Once around the moons of Pluto.
So we have to start this with a
discussion of Pluto itself and its
discovery as part of the search for
planet X organized by PLL sat here with
his hat on backwards at the Flagstaff
Observatory pretending to look through
the large refracting telescope there.
Now the idea for this search was because
Neptune was predicted on the basis of
perturbations that couldn't be accounted
for in the orbit of Uranus and Urban
Levier in Paris and John Cooch Adams in
the UK made the predictions and searches
were carried out and that very rapidly
led to it being discovered by Gala in
Berlin.
But soon after Neptune was discovered,
the orbital calculations were looked at
again and they seem to have an error
left suggesting another planet. So
planet fever took off and lots of people
got involved. Lots of predictions were
made for another planet that was causing
this remaining error
and it was given the name planet X. So
the search was carried out and um went
on for many many years
until Clyde Tombbo in January of 1930
using a blink comparator method of
thousands of image pairs of the night
sky looking to flick backwards and
forwards between pairs of images to see
if anything changed. and he spotted this
small bright moving object which is
picked out in the discovery images from
January 23rd and 29th there with the
handy arrows. Without those arrows, I
think you'd really struggle to see that
the moving object.
Uh now that's Clyde Tombbo on the right
there with his homemade telescope. Not
the one that he used. used a much larger
instrument for uh gaining the
photographs which led to the discovery
of Pluto. But planet Fever had been
running for some time and it really took
off with this discovery. Here's the
Chicago Daily Tribune from March 1930.
See another world in the sky. Scientists
by Planet Hunted for 25 years and
astronomers believe it's big and cold.
Another
section here reports on the position of
the planet and the size and it's
positioned out in the outer solar
system. New world 45 AU 45 times the
Earth sun distance.
Now that was predicted on the basis of
applying the Titus Bode law which was a
rule of thumb that seemed to fit all of
the known planets and indeed predicted
the distance to Uranus quite well.
Neptune not quite so well and Pluto
definitely wrong.
But the masses are and the uh sizes were
interesting. And we have the diameter in
thousands of miles here in the second uh
pane. And we have eight for Earth and 32
for Neptune. And the new planet
somewhere between Earth and Neptune
sized. So quite a big planet indeed
being uh suspected there. Other people
exaggerated even more. Ninth planet
greater than Earth. Well, that's
consistent with that I suppose. New
discovery bears out calculations of ll
most important since that of Neptune.
Savants think it may be bigger than
Jupiter. Wow. Bigger than Jupiter, eh?
Well, the problem is that
everyone was expecting a large planet.
It had to be a large planet if it was
perturbing the orbits of the known
planets, Uranus and Neptune in
particular. And the relatively bright
image in those photographs seemed
consistent with a large size. And of
course, if it was a long way away um
from beyond Neptune, then that would all
seem to fit together with a large size.
Sadly, it wasn't really true. It was
closer than we thought and smaller.
So, bigger than Jupiter, I think not.
And the debate was really put to bed in
the 1978 discovery of Pluto's moon
Sharon.
You can see the image there in the
negative. So black is the bright disc of
Pluto and on one image it's got a lump
sticking out the sides of it. And that
is the discovery of Sharon peeping out
from uh adjacent to Pluto there. But by
studying the images and doing the
calculations using Kepler's third law,
you can work out the mass of Pluto.
Anything where you have an orbiting body
and you know the period of the orbit and
the distance, you can just plug in the
numbers and out pops the mass of the
system.
And so Pluto was 1500th the mass of
Earth. Way, way smaller than anyone was
expecting.
Expectations had been on the way down
though. 1931 people were talking about
it being one times the mass of the
earth. By 1948, Gerald Kiper him of the
Kiper belt fame had predicted a tenth of
the mass of Earth. By 1976, Krookshank
and others had gone for 1/100th.
And 1978, Christian Harrington, the
discovery of Sharon revealed that it was
1500th.
But I love this little bit. It was
predicted to vanish completely based on
these decreasing size estimates in this
graph, which is tongue and cheek. It's a
joke. um they put a curve through those
estimates and it seemed to go to zero in
1980. They even came out with a
mathematical formula for that curve. MP
the mass of Pluto= 12 * open brackets
the cosine of p<unk> / 2 * brackets t -
1848 over 136 to the power of pi. A
completely mad formula. no basis other
than that uh it seemed to just sort of
make this amusing fit. I quite like
that.
Now, after Pluto and Sharon had been
discovered, there was a very lucky
coincidence in that the orbit of Sharon
around carried it across the face of
Pluto and round behind. So it
disappeared behind sometimes. Sometimes
you could see both. Other times it was
blocking part of the light from Pluto.
By studying the overall brightness and
just that it was possible to make this
map of the 360 degree rotation of the
surface of Pluto. And I think it's
amazing because it actually fits reality
quite well. You can see coming around
every now and again there the bright
shape which looks to be roughly the
shape of Africa. And we'll see that
again in the close-up images that we now
have.
In 1990, the Hubble Space Telescope came
along and revealed the two objects. Now,
it's somewhat blurry because this was
taken before Hubble had its eyeglasses
fitted in the servicing mission. And the
post glasses image showed this much
better. Much much clearer, isn't it? But
really for a clear view, we had to wait
for New Horizons to get out to Pluto.
Launched in 2006, going to take about 10
years to cross the solar system, past
all the giant planets, and reach Pluto
and Sharon in 2015.
As it was approaching, 20 million miles
to go, it took this photograph,
beginning to show some real detail on
the surface of the two objects and
immediately better than anything we
could get with the Hubble Space
Telescope at the time.
But the flyby, well, just surprised
everyone. And look at the detail that we
have in this lovely picture of Pluto.
Amazingly, there are very few impact
craters. There are one or two that you
can see and some that are partly buried
in ice. And it is that ice and the
glacia that makes up that uh very bright
region. That's the shape of Africa. So
that rotating map generated just from
the brightness from the eclipses was
pretty good. I think that's moving
across the surface and erasing a whole
series of impact craters.
But the real question and the surprise
was how can there be activity in the
deep freeze this far from the sun? What
is the source of the heat that is
keeping this from being completely
frozen up? Well, here's a lovely color
image as well. This is been
overcolorized to show the different
compositions of the surface layers.
We've got CH4, which is methane up there
in the blue region. Down here, this is
pure water ice with some organic
material mixed into it to give it that
color. Up here, we've got nitrogen frost
and the glacia itself. Well, that's
carbon monoxide, methane, and nitrogen
moving across the surface.
So, that's Pluto. But we're here to talk
about the moons of Pluto. So, let's look
at Sharon. 600 km in diameter, half the
size of Pluto, and 1/8 of its mass. Half
time a half times a half is an eighth.
And so the densities are roughly
similar. In fact, Sharon is a little bit
lower density. As we'll see, the
temperature, well, very cold indeed,
varies with the seasons, and those
seasons seem to be responsible for this
polar cap of reddish brown material,
again, made of those interesting
chemicals that we call tholins. You can
also see some amazing cliffs and the
fact that the two hemispheres are not
really the same. The bottom hemisphere
looks older, covered in many more
craters and not being buried in ice. And
the upper surface has some craters, but
a lot of them are being erased and
buried. So, two distinct hemispheres
going on there.
Well, the name Sharon came from
suggestions from the discoverer Christy
and his wife was called Charlene. And so
Sharon is the received pronunciation for
this. Some people try and pronounce it
Chiron, but there is an object called
Chiron spelled differently. So it's very
confusing. Uh I'm going to call it
Sharon. designated S for satellite, 1978
for the year of discovery, P for Pluto,
number one, and the name, well, the
ferryman of the dead, associated with
the god Pluto of the underworld.
Fantastic. I think that's just right.
Amazingly, it is completely spherical.
New Horizons could not find any
deviation of any significance from a
spherical shape. And that's hydrostatic
equilibrium and tells us that gravity
has dominated the shape of this object.
And that's a characteristic demanded
from the definition of dwarf planet. A
planet is a body that orbits the sun
that
has cleared its orbit of competitors and
that um is round in shape. And a dwarf
planet doesn't have to have cleared its
neighborhood. And so actually Sharon
fits that definition quite nicely if you
argue that it orbits the sun. And
perhaps really what we should be doing
is calling the Pluto Sharon system a
double dwarf planet.
Here is an animation of the orbit of the
two of them. And that close mass ratio.
Sharon is just 12% of the mass of Pluto
in fact. And this means that the two are
orbiting around their common center. The
distance between them is just under
20,000 kilometers. And every six and a
bit days they go round. But Sharon is
really orbiting a point 1,700
sorry 17,181
km from the center of mass and Pluto
goes around the center at a distance of
2,415
km which is double Pluto's diameter. So
really they are orbiting a common center
and are a double object.
They're also in double tidal lock.
Sharon keeps one face to Pluto. Pluto
keeps one face to Sharon. They're
eternally staring at each other. And
that and the circular nature of the
orbit minimizes any tidal effects. So
it's a very very stable situation. No
angular momentum is being sapped away
creating friction in the center anymore.
It probably used to be. And if you stood
on the surface of either and looked up,
you would see the other one apparently
stationary in the sky while all the
other objects in the sky moved.
Looking at the surface of Sharon, we've
got this unwrapped 360
picture. And what we can immediately see
is the detail is much better in that
central region and in the edges. That's
because the edge regions were taken from
earlier and later points on New
Horizon's trajectory. So, the greatest
detail was obtained at greatest uh
proximity, the closest approach point.
And I I love some of the names we've got
here. We've got Kubric there, named
after Stanley Kubri, Kubri Mons, a
mountain. Um you can see the other
names. If we zoom in, we've got these
amazing cliffs and we've got bright
features um and a darker general
surface, but so the brightness is along
the edge of the cliffs suggesting that
that's exposed fresh material, which is
probably why. And quite a few craters.
So, and the amount of cratering there is
an indication that this surface is a
little bit less active than that of
Pluto. We've even got a crater chain.
That diagonal line at the top right
there is a whole series of craters
suggesting that a small object such as a
comet was ripped apart by the gravity
either of Sharon or Pluto and then
crashed into the surface of Sharon one
fragment at a time creating that chain
of craters there.
Spectroscopic analysis shows water ice
um quite a lot of water ice more so than
Pluto. Pluto has more of the volatile
nitrogen and methane, carbon monoxide,
things like that. Um, a stronger gravity
is more able to hang on to them.
The Gemini Observatory in 2007
discovered ammonia hydrate and that the
water was crystalline. And that suggests
a fresh source because solar radiation
and cosmic rays would degrade such
materials in about 30,000 years. And so
we wouldn't see them anymore if the
surface was old and dead. And this is
really suggesting that even up to fairly
recently there has been geological
activity. Um perhaps shrinkage, perhaps
expansion, changing the levels and
exposing new material along the cliff
lines, perhaps low temperature cryo
volcanoes with ice and other materials
bursting to the surface. Uh geysers if
you like. Um, and it probably suggests
that there was once upon a time and may
still be a liquid ocean underneath the
crust, underneath that icy layer.
In the photograph of the whole of the
disc of Sharon there, we can see the
polar region with that red color, the
red spot at the top there. That's the
chemicals again called folins. these
irregular polymers of carbon, hydrogen,
oxygen, and nitrogen that are
potentially the seeds of life itself.
Um, if only it got the chance to get
going. I'm not suggesting that there is
life on Sharon, but I don't know that
there isn't. Maybe in that icy ocean.
You never know, but it seems these
tholins are all over these outer s solar
system objects. But in this case, the
temperature at that north pole is -258
C. And that's cold enough for the
volatile gases, that is carbon,
monoxide, methane, and nitrogen to
freeze out on the surface, perhaps
having been emitted from the atmosphere
of Pluto
and landing here. And then the
radiation, cosmic rays and solar
ultraviolet gets at the uh organic
material
causing chemical reactions and creating
the tholin red brown polymers.
Then when summer comes, it warms up to
minus 213
C and that's warm enough that those uh
lightweight volatiles can boil away
again leaving the tholins behind to
accumulate. So over the seasons
oscillating backwards and forwards maybe
the volatiles evaporate from the summer
pole and migrate down to the cold trap
of the opposite pole the winter side and
back again. But each time they are
exposed to sunlight in the summer the
tholins get cooked up
internally. Well it's slightly less
dense than Pluto. We don't know if
there's any sort of rocky core in the
center. It probably got silicates there.
The very central region might have some
metals and there's probably a water and
water ice outer layer with more of the
water and less of the rock on Sharon.
And uh we don't know if there is a
liquid water layer, but Pluto certainly
does have a liquid water layer. it being
larger, it's better able to trap some
heat in the center and uh keep itself
warmer and so it may be able to actually
support that water layer better than
Sharon. And that's a a bit of an open
question.
Now, we think that
the origin of this entire system was
from a giant collision similar to the
one that created the Earth Moon
combination when a planet hypothesized
to be named Thea crashed into the proto
Earth and created the moon in orbit
around our own planet. And we think
that's happened here, too, creating
Sharon. It probably accounts for the
greater degree of ice and lower amount
of rock that slightly lower density
because it was made of the outer layers
of the two originating objects, the
original Pluto and the impactor. And the
volatile materials were probably
vaporized and then they were not able to
be trapped by the smaller object Sharon
with its lower gravity. Um, basically
these volatile materials, the molecules
within them actually at the
temperatures, they have escape velocity
from Sharon. So they're able to escape
its gravity and then get drawn into the
gravity well of Pluto and condense onto
the more massive object.
Now that impact would have been a very
energy releasing event. It would have
created a lot of heat and the residual
heat in the cores of these two objects.
Plus the tidal effect of stabilizing the
orbit and getting them into tidal lock
would have created additional frictional
heat in the center warming the the
central regions up. And maybe that's
responsible for the younglooking
surfaces and is why Pluto's surface is
much more active and younger looking
than Sharon's. But neither of them have
enough craters still visible to have
accumulated them for 4,500 million
years. Uh something has definitely been
resurfacing them much more recently.
Probably these low temperature
volcanoes. And this is a little uh
animation from the simulations here of
the impactor striking Pluto. KBO Kiper
belt object hits Pluto
causes disruption and uh the two merge
but some of the debris is thrown off
into orbit creating a ring which then
coaleses to Sharon and the bodies being
very warm and molten circularize
themselves into that spherical shape
very rapidly. And then the tidal effect
causes the orbit to become uh very
circular indeed.
So that's possible. The possible also
that the impact was quite a slow event
and there's another similar scenario
creating material again that coaleses to
form Sharon from a much less disruptive
event. So still to be studied.
Now, as New Horizons approached Pluto,
it took a navigation photograph, a long
exposure, and found two new moons, Nyx
and Hydra. It had to do this because it
was going to dive through between Sharon
and Pluto in order to get close-up
images of both of them. And it wanted to
make sure that there wasn't some sort of
debris ring or small moonlets that it
might crash into. So it was having a
good look to see what it could try to
avoid. But we found Nyx and Hydra very
much grayer than Pluto. Pluto's one of
the reddest bodies in the solar system
with all those tholins on it. And these
two were likely created in that impact
that created Sharon. They lost all their
volatile material and are too small to
be able to hang on to it. not enough
gravity and they're just dominated by
water ice giving them that gray color
and not terribly reflective because the
surface is now old and not uh
crystalline anymore as a result of the
action of the solar wind and the cosmic
radiation.
So this is Nyx, goddess of the night,
associated with Pluto of the underworld,
of course, 25day orbit, and it's a bit
elongated, 50 km long ways and 30 km in
the other two dimensions, covered in
water, ice, and an ancient surface. So
again, gray and darkened by the effects
of the solar wind. But on the nose
there, we've got that red material,
tholins again. And that is either
because an impact
caught it and exposed material from
underneath or from the impactor itself
scattering material onto the surface.
Um, but uh again, who knows? It's uh
very fascinating to see it on this
particular moon. The moon itself is
tumbling. rolling around in a chaotic
manner. The rotation axis isn't stable.
It's changed 10% in its spin rate since
it was discovered and the axis has
flipped. Um, so it's axis is now
rotating around a direction that is uh
not as long, has a lower moment of
inertia and therefore has to spin faster
to conserve the angular momentum. Um,
and this chaotic behavior is caused by
the elongated shape and the gravity of
the other moons tugging on it. And again
is a sign that this has not been there
that long. Um, it has not had time to
fully stabilize. Uh, normally these
things would damp down gradually, but in
a smaller object that does take longer.
The orbit has been circularized and it's
a feature of the Pluto system as a whole
that the orbits are all circular damped
out by the tidal interactions with Pluto
and particularly with Sharon. Hydra
named for the multi-headed snake from
Greek mythology that is in a longer
orbit of 38 days and also somewhat
irregular 51 km by 36 but a very odd
shape as you can see. And here's three
images of it suggesting that this is
actually a contact binary. Two smaller
objects got together in a bump merger, a
very low-speed collision. They
encountered each other and stuck
together. So that was probably the two
objects co-orbital around uh the system
and just bumped into each other and then
were able to stick
Now, it's covered in water ice. It's got
more water ice than Pluto and less than
that of Sharon. And you can see the
spectrum of pure ice, of Hydra, and of
Sharon there, just to uh show you how
we've worked that out. Um, and so again,
but there are no sign of any folins on
the surface of this one, although the
photograph is not the best. Just we were
not able to get particularly close to
Hydra.
Now, as
New Horizons approached Pluto, it
continued to take long exposure
photographs again for avoiding
collisions and it found two more moons,
sticks and Kerarus.
Now, in terms of the naming, William
Shatner, that man, Captain Kirk,
proposed the names Vulcan and Romulus
from the Star Trek genre. Um, that would
have been fun. But Vulcan had already
been widely used as a name for the
hypothetical inner planet that uh was
supposed to orbit the sun closer in than
Mercury. And so they decided not to go
with that and used sticks and Kerberus
sticks from the river um that the uh
dead have to cross in the underworld.
And Cerberus or Cerberus was chosen.
Cberus is the Roman name. Cerberus is
the Greek version and was chosen because
Cerberus had already been used for an
asteroid. Um, but Cerberus or Cerberus
was the three-headed dog of uh Pluto.
So sticks itself quite small 17 by 9 km
orbiting in 20 days and it's in a
resonant orbit. So, it's orbiting around
the system
in a 9 to11 ratio with Nyx and in a 6
to11 ratio with Hydra. And in fact, of
course, this tells you that Nyx and
Hydra are in a 3:2 relationship as well.
So there's a lot of these resonances
which are stabilizing the orbits of the
moons in this system and it's not a very
good photograph uh because well it was
taken well before the flyby and they
couldn't point the camera at everything
from point blank range. So that sticks
and this is Kerberous 32day orbit
tumbling chaotically again rather like
Nyx is 19 by 10 by 9 km and again
doubleloed rather like Hydra so probably
a contact binary from the merger of two
smaller objects
and so this is the overall system we
have Pluto in the center there doing its
very tiny orbit around the center of
mass
Then in blue we have Sharon. And then we
have the other four moons in green,
purple, cyan, and red working your way
outwards in those lovely circular orbits
in the resonant pattern that keeps them
stable. And looking at it side on, you
can see that they are all co-planer, all
orbiting around in a single plane. So a
very regular system indeed.
And so here we have again the discovery
images showing Pluto Sharon Pluto Sharon
and two new candidates and then the full
four new moons and you can see the
orbits there. So Pluto then the center
of mass the Barry center Sharon Stixnix
Gerberous and Hydra in that order going
away from the planet and because they're
all orbiting in the one plane that you
do get the opportunity for a whole lot
of eclipses. I talked about the
eclipsing where Sharon was passing
across the line of sight to Earth, but
it can also pass between Pluto and the
Sun, creating a very substantial total
solar eclipse on the surface of Pluto.
Now, we haven't imaged that. That's a an
artist's impression there, created from
a couple of real images, but it would be
great to be able to do so.
And the smaller moons can also do this.
They can cast shadows on Pluto. Rather
smaller, of course. And Nyx and Hydra
are large enough to be able to block out
the whole of the sun. So far away is
Pluto from the sun that the sun looks
tiny. But Gerberos and sticks, well,
they're able to create partial or
irregular eclipses just due to their
smaller size and shape.
Will we find any more moons? Is Is that
it? Are these five that we now know of
the whole lot? Well, the ones we know of
are all very close to Pluto. Really,
they're within the first 3% of its
so-called hill sphere, the region where
its gravity is dominant.
So, in this area, it's pretty crowded.
There's no room for any more stable
orbits. But further out, that is a
possibility. And New Horizon did do an
extensive search. again part of that
navigation program, but also out of
interest looking for any more moons. And
it's ruled out anything larger than 5
kilometers
uh anywhere in the inner part of Pluto's
influence out to double the distance of
Hydra.
So
maybe there are some yet to be found
further out.
And finally, I'm just going to leave you
with Calling Captain Future. this uh
book written by Edmund Hamilton in the
1940s and it talked of three moons of
Pluto and it named them Sharon, Stixs
and Cerberus.
So Cberus, not Cerberus and he missed
two, Nyx and Hydra. Of course, he had no
idea that um these moons existed, but
you never know uh in future
information may become confused. And
there is a tale to this which is that
Jonathan Swift's book um in which the
Leutin uh astronomers in Guliver's
travels are talking about Mars talks
about a pair of moons of Mars and he
wrote that book 150 years before we had
discovered the moons of Mars. So, it's
happened again here, only this time he
got the names right, but I suspect
people had read the books and uh the
names are excellent for the companions
of the god of the underworld anyway. So,
it all makes perfect sense really. So,
thanks very much for listening and I'll
leave you with the moons of Pluto.